this conflict is extremely complicated
and it's difficult to explain to people
exactly what is happening let's uh cross
live now to someone who I think can help
with all the questions that people have
been searching for online and indeed
sending us here at the BBC our Middle
East editor Sebastian Usher is in The
Newsroom very very very very ready as
always to help with uh questions
Sebastian and I suppose that the first
question that we need to ask you is why
is this happening at this moment in
time well I mean there are quite
regularly eruptions in the conflict
specifically between Hamas which
controls Gaza and Israel the last one we
saw was back in 2021 the last really big
uh uh uh confrontation was in 2014 but
there have been a number of wars that
have taken place uh since Hamas took
control of Gaza in 2007 and and Israel
uh imposed a blockade which has held
ever since so those tensions are always
there in the past we have usually seen
uh the conflict although it's had
terrible consequences in the numbers of
people killed particularly in Gaza from
the air strikes that uh Israel launches
in response to Rockets being fired by
Hamas uh but that it it it's been within
a certain kind of lines that both sides
seem to accept that they don't cross in
order to take it into you know Uncharted
Territory what we've seen this time is
that those lines have been crossed those
lines were crossed essentially when
Hamas uh Fighters infiltrated into
Israel and caused I mean the worst uh uh
incident uh for Israel pretty much since
its Inception with hundreds I mean at
the moment we're saying at least 700
Israelis having been killed so that is
the real huge game changer here that is
why this is such a serious situation but
those pressures those tensions as I say
they don't just exist in Gaza as far as
the Palestinians are concerned but in
the occupied West Bank where we've also
seen a major rise in tensions in almost
daily clashes between uh is uh uh the
Israeli military which mounts regular
raids into uh the main towns in the
occupied West Bank and they're met often
with Palestinian fighters who who who
fire back who throw rocks uh EXP exp of
devices uh we've seen several hundred
Palestinians many of them Fighters but
some of them civilians killed over the
past year and a half and that so this
hasn't come out of nowhere but the
surprise is the way that Hamas executed
its attack on Israel Sebastian many
people uh have been searching this
particular question and and it is is
Palestine is Gaza an actual
country it it it's not officially
formally a country as such I mean Gaza
is part of a Palestinian territor as as
I was just saying there's there's Gaza
there's the there's the occupied West
Bank and there's East Jerusalem and it
and its surroundings which is seen as
part of the Palestinian territories um
the the the the Palestinian Authority
the PLO which uh is essentially the
original uh real driving force of
Palestinian stat ship declared that it
was a state many decades ago and some
countries have accepted Palestine as
state but uh there are a number of
others who haven't the us being perhaps
the main one um so what it has at the
moment is that the UN it has uh uh
Observer status non-member Observer
status which is essentially close to
being uh accepted as a state but not a
state and we still talk about uh the
peace process that has been going on for
years but it's been stalled for a long
time now the main objective through much
of that was to create a Palestinian
State the so-called two-state um
solution to the Israeli Palestinian
conflict another question many people
have been asking Sebastian is does Hamas
represent uh
Palestine no it doesn't represent
Palestine I mean it is one of the two
main factions as I say it has controlled
Gaza since 2007 holy uh uh um controlled
Gaza since then it won the last
elections in the Palestinian territories
in 2006 it then fought a battle with
fata which is the party uh that
essentially runs uh uh the occupied West
Bank and it drove them out so it's been
in control since then it's an islamist
organization it's ideology originally
comes from a Muslim Brotherhood in Egypt
so I mean Palestines themselves uh many
of them are not Muslims they are
Christians there are face there as well
so it certainly doesn't represent the
entirety of the Palestinians by any
means it does represent for a number of
Palestinians not just the islamist uh
ideology which some support but also the
sense of resistance to Israel seen as
the most actively uh uh um the most
active in that resistance as we're
seeing once again here the pales
authority the PLO fata have moved
towards in in the past three decades to
essentially accepting Israel's right to
exist and no longer confronting it
militarily h has never changed uh from
its military stance towards Israel that
it sees Israel as its enemy and it will
fight Israel as we've seen regularly uh
this being the most extreme example of
the of the uh uh that we've seen so far
Sebastian another question that is one
of the most searched on the Internet is
who are the Palestinians can you explain
that with to us given obviously there a
very long history So within the time
frame obviously yes no there is a long
history I mean the word Palestine dates
back I mean at least 2,000 years it was
used in Roman times it was adopted uh in
the early days of Islam uh it was Arab
sized there was um a
Palestine existing uh
as I mean again we can't say as a state
but as a region for a very long time and
people identifying as Palestinians for a
very long time the Mandate that existed
under the British uh that came before
Israel was established at its dependence
in 1948 1949 was known as Palestine so I
mean Palestine is very much an accepted
uh way of referring to that region but
there are many problems with that it you
know in terms of uh how large a part of
that region is seen as Palestine who it
should belong to uh these
counternarratives that there are I mean
many uh
Israelis would go back further they
would go back to the biblical
denomination of many of those areas
talking of Judea and Samaria and other
words like that so I mean though
historically it is a fact and there's no
question about uh the sense of there
being a Palestine and there being a
Palestinian people the actual way in
which that's interpreted is still open
to question and depending on what
perspective people are looking at from s
Main's you know a very live debate but
certainly for the Palestinians who
identifies as pales opinions and that's
not just in the palestin territories but
beyond the the the huge diaspora both in
the w g camps that spread across parts
of the Middle East but well beyond that
they obviously naturally 100% see
themselves a Palestinians even if there
is no formal Palestinian State as such
at the moment and Sebastian finally one
of the biggest uh or the most asked
questions online is who backs
Hamas well I mean financially one of its
main supporters has been uh Qatar but
Qatar would make a distinction between
supporting the people of Gaza uh who
obviously have faced immense problems
economically uh it's one of the poorest
areas in the world um they would say
that the money that they give through
Hamas because Hamas controls Gaza is for
the people that it doesn't support
necessarily the political uh uh um
agenda of Hamas it doesn't support what
Hamas is doing now necessarily it does
believe in um the Palestinian bid for
its own State uh for its own identity it
supports that 100% it does believe that
the Palestinians face huge problems much
of them they believe uh resulting from
Israel and its occupation but it would
not say that it directly supports Hamas
as an entity you have other countries
such as Iran which do openly support
Hamas and what it's trying to achieve
and and we've seen since this assault uh
happened that Iran has very openly come
out and shown its backing and said that
it uh uh believes that Israel is
essentially reaping the wind uh that it
swn so and and also in in military terms
in the past maybe not so much now but a
lot of the hardware a lot of the
missiles that uh G that that Hamas was
somehow able to get despite the blockade
around uh uh Gaza were Ian made in more
recent years they've been able to
manufacture many of those themselves
within Gaza Syria again the the so-call
AIS of resistance and then other
non-state players particularly hasbullah
for example in Lebanon which did make a
gesture um by firing some mortars
towards Israel uh in in in uh on on the
second day of this assault but hasn't so
far committed itself beyond that Lebanon
as a country supports again the right of
the Palestinians to resist to defend
themselves but the government such as it
is in Lebanon wouldn't go all out in
support of Hamas so there are backers um
but it's not hugely widespread I would
say the most important would be Iran and
cata financially at
least Sebastian thank you very much
indeed Sebastian Asha there giving a
full explanation to all of those
questions that you have been uh
searching for online